Significant Figures.

Accuracy and Precision.

Science is based on measurements, which are characterized by accuracy and precision.

Accuracy is how close a measurement is to the accepted reference value.

For example, standard letter-sized paper is 8.5 inches wide and 11 inches long. We then measure the length of the paper 3 times and obtain the following measurements:

Measurement 1: 11.1 inches,

Measurement 2: 11.2 inches,

Measurement 3: 10.9 inches.

These measurements are quite accurate because they are very close to the reference value of l_ ref equals 11.0 inches (i.e., the deviation from the reference value is small). If we had obtained a measurement of 12 inches, our measurement would not be very accurate.

Precision is how close the agreement is between repeated measurements. It does not depend on an accepted reference value.

The precision of measurements characterizes the spread of the measured values. The lowest measured value was 10.9 inches, and the highest value was 11.2 inches. The measured values deviated from each other by 0.3 inches.

These measurements were relatively precise because they did not vary too much in value. However, if measurement 2 was 11.9 inches, then the measurements would not be very precise.

The course webpage includes a figure here.

Uncertainty and Discrepancy.

The uncertainty in the measurements is related to the precision, where a precise measurement has a lower spread (i.e., more certain). The discrepancy describes how the measurements are related to the accuracy, where an accurate measurement is close to the accepted reference value.

Recall our example of measuring paper length. We might average the three measurements:

The average length equals 11.1 plus 11.2 plus 10.9, divided by 3, which equals 11.1 inches.

In this case our discrepancy is the average length minus the reference length equals 11.1 minus 11.0, or 0.1 inches, which provides a quantitative measure of accuracy.

We might calculate the uncertainty in our measurement by using half of the range of our measured values: 11.2 minus 10.9, divided by 2, equals 0.15 inches. Then we would say that the length of the paper is 11.1 inches plus or minus 0.15 inches.

The uncertainty in a measurement A is often denoted as delta A, so the measurement would be recorded as A plus or minus delta A.

Since the discrepancy ( 0.1 inches ) is less than the uncertainty ( 0.15 inches ), we might say the measured value agrees with the accepted reference value within experimental uncertainty.

Some factors that contribute to uncertainty in a measurement are:

Limitations of the measuring device,

The skill of the person taking the measurement,

Irregularities in the object being measured,

Environmental factors that affect the outcome.

In our example, the uncertainty could be the smallest division on the ruler is one sixteenth of an inch, the person using ruler has poor eyesight, the ruler is worn down on one end, or one side of the paper is longer than the other.

Percent uncertainty.

Another method of expressing uncertainty is calculating how much the uncertainty deviates from the average value as a percent. Suppose a measurement A plus or minus delta A, the percent uncertainty is:

Percent uncertainty equals delta A divided by A, times 100 percent.

Checkpoint. Pause and check your understanding.

If two measurements have the same absolute uncertainty, which one has the larger percent uncertainty: the smaller measurement or the larger measurement?

Example Problem: Uncertainty in a bag of apples.

The Problem.
A grocery store sells 5-pound bags of apples. Suppose we purchase four bags during the course of a month and weigh the bags each time. We obtain the following measurements:
Week 1 weight: 4.8 pounds
Week 2 weight: 5.3 pounds
Week 3 weight: 4.9 pounds
Week 4 weight: 5.4 pounds
We then determine the average weight of the 5-pound bag of apples is 5.1 plus or minus 0.3 pounds using half of the range. What is the percent uncertainty of the bag’s weight?

The Model.

The measured weight of the bag is treated as a single physical quantity A with an associated uncertainty delta A. The percent uncertainty provides a dimensionless measure of how large the uncertainty is relative to the measured value itself.

We model the percent uncertainty using the ratio delta A over A, which compares the absolute uncertainty to the average value.

The Math.

The percent uncertainty is defined as

Percent uncertainty equals delta A divided by A, times 100 percent.

For this problem, the average weight is A equals 5.1 pounds, and the uncertainty is delta A equals 0.3 pounds.

Substituting these values gives

Percent uncertainty equals 0.3 pounds divided by 5.1 pounds, times 100 percent,
which equals 5.9 percent,
or approximately 6 percent.

The Conclusion.

The percent uncertainty in the weight of the bag of apples is 6 percent.

Uncertainties in Calculations.

Uncertainty exists in anything calculated from measured quantities. The area of a floor calculated from measurements has an uncertainty because the length and width measurements have uncertainties.

How big is the uncertainty if something you calculate by multiplication or division?

If the measurements going into the calculation have small uncertainties, less than or approximately equal to 5 percent, then the method of adding percents can be used for multiplication or division. This method states:

The percent uncertainty in a quantity calculated by multiplication or division is the sum of the percent uncertainties in the items used to make the calculation.

Suppose a floor has a length of 4.00 meters and a width of 3.00 meters, with uncertainties of 2 percent and 1 percent, respectively. Then the area of the floor is A equals length times width, which equals 12.0 square meters, and has an uncertainty of 1 percent plus 2 percent, which equals 3 percent, or delta A equals 12.0 times 0.03, which is approximately 0.4 square meters.

Precision of Measuring Tools.

An important factor in measurement precision involves the precision of the measuring tool. A precise measuring tool is one that can measure values in very small increments. For example,

a standard ruler can measure to the nearest millimeter,

and a caliper can measure length to the nearest 0.01 millimeter.

Some measuring tools are limited by physical or logical constraints. If you are measuring the number of people in a group, you must measure using whole numbers because a fractional person does not make sense.

When we express measured values, we can only list as many digits that match the precision of our measuring tool. For example, we cannot list a measurement of 36.71 centimeters precisely because our standard ruler is only marked to the nearest 0.1 centimeter. Instead, the person measuring would indicate a measurement of 36.6 centimeters or 36.7 centimeters, whichever appears closest, and indicate an error of 0.05 centimeter. For example, 36.7 centimeters plus or minus 0.05 centimeter. Note: the 0.05 centimeter comes from the heuristic of denoting error as half of the smallest possible measurement.

Using the method of significant figures, the rule is that the last digit reported in a measurement is the first uncertain digit. To determine the number of significant digits in a value,

start with the first, or leftmost, nonzero measured value,

and count the number of digits through the last, or rightmost, digit.

For example, 36.7 centimeters has three significant digits. Significant digits indicate the precision of the measuring tool used.

The course webpage includes examples showing how to identify significant figures.

Zeros.

Special consideration is given to zeros when counting significant figures. The zeros in 0.052 grams are not significant because they are placeholders that locate the decimal point. The zeros in 10.053 are significant because they are bounded, on the left and right, by nonzero numbers. The number has five significant figures.

The zeros in 1300 may or may not be significant because you can measure exactly that amount or round to the nearest significant figure based on your measuring tool. To avoid this ambiguity, we should write 1300 in scientific notation as

1.3 times ten to the third, with 2 significant figures,

1.30 times ten to the third, with 3 significant figures,

or 1.300 times ten to the third, with 4 significant figures,

depending on the precision of the measurement. Zeros are significant except when they serve only as placeholders.

Checkpoint. Pause and check your understanding.

Why is 1300 ambiguous, but 1.30 times ten to the third is not?

Quick Rules for Significant Figures.

For multiplication or division, match the number of significant figures in the least precise measured value. For example, 10.2 meters has 3 significant figures, so pi times the quantity 10.2 meters squared should be reported with 3 significant figures.

For addition or subtraction, match the least precise decimal place. For example, 7.56 kilograms minus 6.052 kilograms plus 13.7 kilograms is rounded to the tenths place.

Exact counted values or defined conversion factors do not limit the number of significant figures. For example, 1 kilometer equals 1000 meters is exact.

For ambiguous trailing zeros, use scientific notation to show the intended precision. For example, 1.30 times ten to the third has 3 significant figures.

Significant Figures in Calculations.

When combining measurements with different degrees of precision using arithmetic operations, such as addition, subtraction, multiplication, or division, the final number of significant digits can be no greater than the least-precise measured value. There are separate rules for addition and subtraction, and multiplication and division.

First, for addition and subtraction, the answer can contain no more decimal places than the least precise measurement. For example,

7.56 kilograms minus 6.052 kilograms plus 13.7 kilograms equals 15.208 kilograms, which is approximately 15.2 kilograms,

where the final value is rounded to the tenths place because the least precise value, 13.7 kilograms, is measured to the tenths place.

Second, for multiplication and division, the result should have the same number of significant figures as the least precise measurement. For example,

pi times the quantity 10.2 meters squared equals 326.85129 and so on square meters, which is approximately 327 square meters,

where the final value is rounded to the ones place because 10.2 meters has 3 significant figures.
